I have written before about the possible
links between Freewheel Consciousness
creativity explanations and knowledge
and choice
links in the description to this video
or podcast for that that article I'm
referring to now was itself me riffing
off a brief passage in the beginning of
infinity by David Deutsch which appears
on page 157 part of chapter 7 artificial
creativity In this passage David refers
to AI artificial intelligence but he's
referring to the earlier traditional
usage these days we would say AGI the
passage I'm referring to goes like this
quote AI abilities must have some sort
of universality special purpose thinking
would not count as thinking in the
Turing sense intended my guess is that
every AI is a person a general purpose
explainer it is conceivable that there
are other levels of universality between
Ai and Universal explainer Constructor
and perhaps separate levels for those
Associated attributes like Consciousness
but those attributes all seem to have
arrived in one jump to universality in
humans and although we have little
explanation of any of them I know of no
plausible argument that they are at
different levels or can be achieved
independently of each other so I
tentatively assume that they cannot end
quote David Deutsch in chapter 7 of the
beginning of infinity we have little
explanation of any of them and nor do I
nor do I pretend to here and now but I
do want to probe them a little further
and here I want to focus more narrowly
today just on Consciousness and
creativity have you ever done something
on autopilot of course you have we all
have many of us have had the experience
whether we walk drive or ride a regular
route between work and home or the shops
and home or wherever and home that we
can make the journey on a particular day
and never quite recall exactly how it is
we got from a A to B others know what
it's like to work in some place
assembling a thing over and again and
doing the same repetitive motion over
and again we have a term second nature
to describe those activities so familiar
to us they appear to be part of our
being a natural part it's second nature
to me now how to use parts of certain
video editing software to make my
podcasts I used to have to think
carefully about each and every step but
no more
second nature second nature or doing
things on autopilot tends to apply to
activities that become rather
straightforward to do and which we are
not attempting to improve so sport in
general does not count because although
we might be highly competent at a
particular skill there we are also
trying hard to improve if only in the
slightest way possible and we're having
fun with that exact thing it is more
often the mundane things that can tend
to be handed over to the unconscious or
at least less conscious part of the Mind
assembling widgets knitting driving a
car or riding a bike along a familiar
road is like this those things can often
be largely automated by our own minds
and bodies we may become not so much
bored by such an activity but we are not
actively trying to improve our
performance in that activity we reach a
certain level of competence we know gets
the job done and at that point it
becomes so routine we can actually begin
to allow our minds to do other things we
were doing that activity automatically
or rather unconsciously it is not to say
we were unconscious while doing it
strictly but whatever part of the mind
is devoted to controlling that part of
our behavior is somehow operating
without our consciously paying attention
to it moment to moment or at least much
attention to it creativity may still be
going on but it is of an unconscious
kind
frees us up to think of other things to
put most of our creativity into paying
attention to our other conscious
thoughts I think this capacity of human
beings to do things on autopilot or
unconsciously even though it is not
strictly unconscious is a clue as to the
connection between Consciousness and
creativity if I am riding an unfamiliar
route on my bike I can be listening
intently to an audiobook and might
travel many kilometers and by the end of
the journey have a reasonably good
recollection of each part of that
journey I can recall landmarks a
particular dog that barked in some yard
a child running in the opposite
direction pursued by their mother
pushing a pram I have a more Vivid
recollection if this is the first time I
have been along that particular route
however in the case of a far more
familiar route one I have completed
hundreds of times before the activity
itself manages to get done by a part of
my mind not paying attention to the land
indeed I can get all the way home and
catch myself and wonder how did I get
here this is especially true if
engrossed in something else for those
concerned about safety this is on a
track devoted entirely to pedestrians
and bicycles and I only provide very
slowly this phenomenon by the way has a
name highway hypnosis or Road hypnosis
you can look that up on Wikipedia and it
can be very dangerous
I do not wish to discuss the dangers and
will rather just refer to the somewhat
less dangerous form I am personally more
familiar with the riding of a bicycle
and not on any road much less a highway
alongside many other vehicles traveling
at high speeds carrying passengers
the analog of highway hypnosis crops up
in many places riding a bike along a
familiar track is obviously very closely
related the riding of the bike becomes
almost like breathing it's not as if I
cannot suddenly take control of the
autonomic nervous system in this regard
should a child Dart suddenly across the
path in front of me suddenly I can be
brought back to the present moment so to
speak and slam on the brakes and there
we have it creativity is back in the
saddle in the audiobook I was listening
to entirely forgotten as I try to avoid
injury to us both one might even at that
moment apply Consciousness directly to
the breath in an attempt to calm down
take a deep breath and all that
Consciousness and creativity are focused
on the here and now at that moment but
if I resume the journey after some time
I can return to paying attention to just
what I was listening to but I have to
rewind to pick up what I've missed
Consciousness is a Fickle thing that's
not like to be split between activities
at least not evenly split but it can
readily switch in this case too once
more not paying attention certainly not
in the same way to riding steering
breaking and accelerating instead I am
focused back on my audio having done
this route hundreds of times before the
instructions for this journey are there
in memory somehow connected to behavior
while bypassing consciousness
bypassing creativity but clearly not
entirely it's not like I am entirely
unconscious of the Journey highway
hypnosis is an altered state of
consciousness not a truly unconscious
state but as a matter of subjectivity it
seems probative of this Consciousness
and creatively link what makes the
difference between a truly dumb
unconscious computer like Sam robot
which is able to move from A to B
reliably and a person doing so in the
way I described unconsciously or under
highway hypnosis or something similar
the difference is that of course the
person never is actually unconscious to
describe their activity as being
completed unconsciously is a manner of
speaking but it is not entirely
meaningless they are of course the
person conscious but the part of the
mind they are primarily aware of and
which is laying down memories is the
conscious part while the part actually
completing the task of getting from A to
B has been handed over to a part of the
mind that is simply performing some
instructions with little or perhaps no
creativity and seems not to be recorded
in memory in that sense and to that
extent the person is emulating the
behavior of an AI completing the task
unconsciously while doing other things
with their Consciousness like thinking
of other more interesting things working
through more interesting problems than
getting from A to B we of course do not
know how the mind works in any
fine-grained way this is just a
corollary of David's we have little
explanation of any of them namely the
features Minds have but we do know as a
matter of personal subjectivity that
there are intrusions possible from the
conscious part of the Mind into the
unconscious and vice versa as I have
already indicated but the idea people
can learn to perform routine tasks in a
way that is so reliable they no longer
need to pay barely any attention to them
is a clue about the link between
Consciousness and creativity
certainly anything unconscious is not
creative a robot or any existing
computer is not conscious assume some
robot is okay which part of it not its
hands for it has no sensation there its
eyes but those are just cameras the
processor it's just some Hardware a
person's mind is conscious and we
experience qualia Sensations we
experience Sensations precisely in those
places where we have nerds for Sensation
that aside we know robots are not
creative anyway if the unconscious is
not creative does the converse hold as
well is the uncreative always
unconscious well we cannot say and this
is controversial I've written before
about whether it follows if other
animals being uncreative are conscious
in any way that resembles what is going
on with people I will not recapitulate
that argument here and now the link is
at
www.breathhall.org humans and other
animals just Google to find that one can
we learn anything about this link
between Consciousness and creativity
ourselves as a matter of deliberate
introspection when some people meditate
they report a sense of not having a self
but if that sense is just a sense that
one is not being creative at that moment
because of some deliberate intention not
to be so to deliberately drop one's
problem so to speak it is unsurprising
to conclude there is no self if the self
is a creative thing that deals with
problems if you look and detect no
creativity and the self is that which is
creative then it would seem to be a
reasonable conclusion to draw of course
the self merely has the potential to be
creative
so if it is not being actualized because
it is in some kind of idle state it
should not be unsurprising not to notice
it or rather to notice it not doing
anything and for some then so it's not
really there at all seems a reasonable
conclusion to draw deliberately not
being creative not being lost in thought
would then be the perfect way to be
aware of not being a self of course this
is all a kind of empiricist debate the
idea that because we can or cannot sense
something about ourselves is no clue
whatsoever that such a thing exists or
does not exist the inability to have a
sense of self is neither proof nor
refutation of anything about the self it
is at best a demonstration of one's
fallibility even about the fact of
Consciousness and it can be a starting
point it can be a problem to be
explained what the selfie is is a
question in need of good explanation not
merely a sensation or an experience
insofar as it is an experience once
again we are returned to the question
what is the explanation of that
experience or experience period I have
no answers here about precisely the link
between Consciousness and creativity if
we pay attention which is to say direct
our Consciousness to a particular task
what we are doing is bringing into our
awareness some activity so that we can
think about it play with it problem
solve and be creative with it perhaps
have fun other activities we are
familiar with very much can be done
Loosely speaking unconsciously and
although we do not mean strictly
unconsciously we do mean something like
automatically like an automaton we are
not quite problem solving in the same
way to the same degree when we are on
autopilot driving home or writing a
familiar path or performing that same
daily task or in other words in that
particular domain we are not learning
not truly learning we are entities that
learn we cannot switch that capacity off
but we do seem to have the capacity to
learn how to learn while doing other
things we have already learned if that
is not needlessly convoluted to rephrase
once we have conjectured the knowledge
then tested it in the world and found
that it solves our problem then this
knowledge can run like an algorithm it
seems directing our Behavior while that
which we really are the conscious
creative entity that is a person is able
to move on to learning other things this
happens when we are on so-called
autopilot our creativity and
Consciousness is Elsewhere for a time
working on other problems for which we
do not know Solutions in that particular
area like for example with me what might
be said next in the audiobook but the
unconscious mind that under highway
hypnosis while it might be solving
problems in some sense knowing which way
to steer and when to Pedal a little
harder or when to apply the break cannot
deal with the unexpected so well for if
it does encounter the problem not
encountered before Consulting its
existing library of instructions about
what to do next is of no use and so our
message needs to be sent quick smart to
take over Consciousness again why
because we need some creative thinking
as I have flagged I think these facts
are important clues about not merely a
link but a necessary connection
if not a Continuum of a Kind between
Consciousness and creativity and is one
reason my guess is that it is just not
possible in the AGI debate
to think we could ever build a system
that is truly creative
but simultaneously unconscious I think
the idea that it is possible arises from
that empiricist mistake people make when
thinking deeply about for example what
happens when they have been meditating
in thinking back to their experience
they feel they have had a sensation of
what Consciousness is in some direct way
and conclude wrongly that it can be
entirely divorced from thinking because
they feel as if they are not identical
to thoughts while only having them this
may contain a grain of Truth one is not
identical to their thoughts or any
particular thought they merely have
thoughts and ideas as I have argued
elsewhere
description but if Consciousness is
something more like the potential for
creativity then we can witness rare
occasions such as during highway
hypnosis flow States and mindfulness
where our creativity is not being
utilized hardly at all during that
activity and is freed up to do otherwise
but the point is it creativity is there
doing other work and Consciousness is
there aware of that other work while
neither creativity nor Consciousness are
devoted to the mundane routine task we
ourselves experience our peak of
creativity and productivity when most
conscious most awake and aware and Alive
precisely in those places we are
devoting most of our attention to when
tired or working on autopilot we are
less aware of what we are doing less
conscious in a sense and necessarily I
would say less creative about those
things I do not think this is merely a
correlation but something deeper is
creativity Consciousness exactly are
they two words labeling some unifying
quality of mind which are future Theory
thereof will illuminate for us are both
of them but two facets of some third
more complicated thing which
incorporates equally contentious Notions
of Free Will qualia and more besides we
don't know but it should be telling that
our own experience of Consciousness end
off being creative is telling us
something about reality even if it is
not easy to put these experiences into
words but the fact we can not easily
speak of these things there's no reason
to think we cannot speak of these things
it just means we do not know how yet we
lack good explanations but that's just
to say we have some problems and until
these problems are solved attempting to
provide good explanations of whether
some AI is or is not conscious or
creative will be entirely elusive if we
cannot provide an equally good
explanation of how it is that humans are
[Music]